---
title: 'God is decentralised'
date: '2023-01-05'
---
Some people experience auditory hallucinations. These voices are not generated by conscious will. Most people are able to talk to themselves, but hearing voices that we do not perceive as originating from our own free will is unique. These auditory hallucinations are often associated with mental illness, in the case of psychosis, schizophrenia.

Interestingly, healthy individuals who are also religious experience the same phenomenal of hearing voices from god. These voices are not perceived as being generated as from their own free will.

In a similar vein, perhaps god is a manifestation of a part of our brain that is out of the purview of free will and we perceive it as not part of the same consciousness as ourselves. In a sense, god is lives within our brains. This part of the brain does not necessarily have to be god, it can be a childhood imaginary friend, or a devil calling you to do bad things. The argument here is that reading the bible moulds this part of the brain to be as god-like as possible.

We then arrive at the conclusion:

Everyone has a copy of god in their heads. New interpretations of god are accepted through a consensus mechanism within churches. This may lead to different forks of ‘god’.

As long as a single believer of god is ‘alive’ or a single copy of the bible is present, god can be recreated. However, if all copies are completely destroyed, then god will be destroyed too.

God is a neural network training based on the bible. With a greater training data set, each the output of the neural network becomes closer to the output of the ‘god’ that was agreed upon by consensus.

The reason why religion is timeless and able to stand the test of time is due to its neural network nature and ability to make predictions on the ‘god-like’ response even in new scenarios.

A neural network trained on the fundamental principles of god can be applied to new scenarios in new generations. This is way in the age of advanced science and technology, religion is still widespread. The same neural network that was trained on the bible can still produce new godly outputs based on the new context that it is in.